Abstract. Bridges are critical-infrastructure components of road and rail
transport networks. A large number of these critical assets cross or are
adjacent to waterways and floodplains and are therefore exposed to flood
actions such as scour, hydrodynamic loading, and inundation, all of which are
exacerbated by debris accumulations. These stressors are widely recognized
as responsible for the vast majority of bridge failures around the world,
and they are expected to be exacerbated due to climate change. While efforts
have been made to increase the robustness of bridges to the flood hazard,
many scientific and technical gaps remain. These gaps were explored during
an expert workshop that took place in April 2021 with the participation of
academics, consultants, and decision makers operating mainly in the United
Kingdom and specializing in the fields of bridge risk assessment and
management and flood resilience. The objective of the workshop was to
identify and prioritize the most urgent and significant impediments to
bridge flood resilience. In particular, the following issues, established at
different levels and scales of bridge flood resilience, were identified and
analysed in depth: (i) characterization of the effects of floods on
different bridge typologies, (ii) uncertainties in formulae for scour depth
assessment, (iii) evaluation of consequences of damage, (iv) recovery
process after flood damage, (v) decision-making under uncertainty for
flood-critical bridges, and (vi)Â use of event forecasting and monitoring
data for increasing the reliability of bridge flood risk estimations. These
issues are discussed in this paper to inform other researchers and
stakeholders worldwide, guide the directions of future research in the
field, and influence policies for risk mitigation and rapid response to
flood warnings, ultimately increasing bridge resilience.
                    