Abstract. Several past episodes of rapid carbon cycle and climate change are
hypothesised to be the result of the Earth system reaching a tipping point
beyond which an abrupt transition to a new state occurs. At the
Palaeocene–Eocene Thermal Maximum (PETM) at ∼56 Ma and at subsequent
hyperthermal events, hypothesised tipping points involve the abrupt transfer
of carbon from surface reservoirs to the atmosphere. Theory suggests that
tipping points in complex dynamical systems should be preceded by critical
slowing down of their dynamics, including increasing temporal autocorrelation
and variability. However, reliably detecting these indicators in
palaeorecords is challenging, with issues of data quality, false positives,
and parameter selection potentially affecting reliability. Here we show that
in a sufficiently long, high-resolution palaeorecord there is consistent
evidence of destabilisation of the carbon cycle in the ∼1.5 Myr prior
to the PETM, elevated carbon cycle and climate instability following both the
PETM and Eocene Thermal Maximum 2 (ETM2), and different drivers of carbon
cycle dynamics preceding the PETM and ETM2 events. Our results indicate a
loss of “resilience” (weakened stabilising negative feedbacks and greater
sensitivity to small shocks) in the carbon cycle before the PETM and in the
carbon–climate system following it. This pre-PETM carbon cycle
destabilisation may reflect gradual forcing by the contemporaneous North
Atlantic Volcanic Province eruptions, with volcanism-driven warming
potentially weakening the organic carbon burial feedback. Our results are
consistent with but cannot prove the existence of a tipping point for abrupt
carbon release, e.g. from methane hydrate or terrestrial organic carbon
reservoirs, whereas we find no support for a tipping point in deep ocean
temperature.
                    