Abstract. Our knowledge of the properties of precipitation and
clouds over their life cycles has progressed with the rapid development of
satellite observations. However, previous studies have focused on the life
cycle evolution of the macroscale features of precipitation and clouds,
whereas the evolution of the microphysical properties of precipitation and
clouds over their life cycles is yet to be determined. One of the reasons
for this lack of knowledge is the fact that there is no single dataset
providing both the three-dimensional structure of precipitation and the
relevant life cycle properties. We identified initial rain clusters (RCs)
from the Global Precipitation Measurement (GPM) 2ADPR dataset and mesoscale
convective systems (MCSs) from the Himawari-8 Advanced Himawari Image (AHI)
gridded product. Based on the contours of the initial RCs and MCSs, we then
carried out a series of resilient processes, including filtration,
segmentation, and consolidation, to obtain the final RCs. The final RCs had
a one-to-one correspondence with the relevant MCS. We extracted the RC area,
central location, average radar reflectivity profile, average droplet size
distribution profile, and other precipitation information from the contours
of the final RCs and GPM 2ADPR dataset. The life cycle evolution of the MCS
area, location, and cloud-top brightness temperature were retrieved from the
corresponding MCSs and their tracks from Himawari-8 observations. The final
dataset provides both three-dimensional precipitation information and life
cycle information of precipitating clouds during April to June 2016–2020
over eastern Asia. This dataset facilitates studies of the life cycle
evolution of precipitation and provides a good foundation for convection
parameterizations in precipitation simulations. The dataset used in this
paper is freely available at https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.6198716 (Zhang et al., 2022).
                    